MBR - Master Boot Record

by: Joe Allen (jhallen@world.std.com)
archived: ftp://ftp.worcester.com/pub/joe/mbr.tar.Z

This is a simple boot manager which provides a prompt on bootup to allow you
select which operating system to load.

As with any software which modifies your boot sector, use caution.  Backup
your files.  Back up your boot sector (dd </dev/hda >backup count=1 bs=512).
Make boot floppies.  You get the idea.

Features & Notes:

- The feature that makes MBR unique is its optional ability to set the
  active flag of the partition you select for booting.  If the active flag is
  set to a different partition, MBR sets it and writes the partition table
  back to the hard drive.

  Some operating systems need this to work properly, for example: SCO-Xenix.

  However, this feature is also useful for having two primary DOS partitions
  on your hard drive (say one for Windows-95 and one for MS-DOS) without
  having to run fdisk each time you want to select between them.

  How can you have two primary DOS partitions you say?  Easy, create the
  first one and install DOS or Windows-95.  Next, change its ID code to
  something DOS doesn't recognize with fdisk in Linux.  Now install the
  second one, and then go back and restore the proper ID code to the first
  one.

  When DOS boots and sees two primary partitions it picks the one with
  the active flag set to be the C: drive, or if neither has the active
  flag set, it picks the first one.  It makes the other partition the D:
  drive.

- This program does not replace LILO for linux.  You must install LILO
  in your Linux partition (boot = /dev/hda1 or whatever in lilo.conf), not
  as the master boot record (boot = /dev/hda), otherwise you will not be
  able to boot linux after running mbr.

  Eventually I'm going to write a real boot loader for that empty first
  block of the ext2 fs, but I haven't yet so you still need LILO.

- MBR is a compact assembly language program which fits entirely in the
  first sector of the hard drive.

- MBR allows you to name each partition and select which of these is the
  default if the user hits enter without typing in a name at the boot
  prompt.

- If the entered name does not match any of the partitions, a list of
  the named partitions is displayed.

- MBR allows you to set a timeout value for the boot prompt.  It can be
  set to wait indefinitely, boot instantly (no prompt), or boot the default
  partition after a specified delay.

- MBR only boot primary partitions.  It does not handle extended partitions
  or booting from anything but the first hard drive.

Files:

mbr.c		Source code of installer
		in Linux compile this with: cc -o mbr mbr.c
		Run with 'mbr' if /dev/hda is your boot drive
		or 'mbr /dev/sda' if you use SCSI or some other boot drive.

mbr.exe		mbr.c compiled for MS-DOS with Turbo-C 2.0
		(tcc -O -Z -d mbr.c)

boot.asm	Masm source code of the boot record
		I used MASM 6.11 to assemble: ml /c boot.asm
		And ALINK to link: alink -o boot.bin boot.obj <boot.lnk
		And cvt.c to convert to C source code: cvt boot.bin
		(ftp://ftp.worcester.com/pub/joe/ alink.tar.Z).

boot.lnk	Segment positioning data for ALINK.

cvt.c		Program to convert binary file to C source code.
